For Blockchain application we use the non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs


Requirements of a zero-knowledge proof

## A ZK proof must satisfy the following criteria:

Completeness: If the input is valid, the proof must always convince the verifier.
Soundness: It must be practically impossible for a prover to trick the verifier with an invalid input (well, 99.999999% impossible).
Zero-knowledge: The verifier (or any observer) learns nothing about the secret, only that the input satisfies the proof.
A zero-knowledge proof contains three elements:

1. Witness: The secret information or data that the prover knows and uses to demonstrate that a statement is true. For example, in the equation , the witness would be . Typically, this is an array of inputs to the circuit.

2. Statement/Claim: The claim that the prover is making about the witness. For instance, "I know an  that satisfies. " Individual requirements are known as constraints. A collection of constraints forms a circuit that makes up the claim that the prover is making.

3. Proof: The actual cryptographic proof generated by the prover, which the verifier checks to confirm the claim without revealing the witness itself.



## Types of zero-knowledge proof systems

SNARK (Succinct Non-Interactive Argument of Knowledge) - is a broad class of ZKP systems that are non-interactive (there is no back and forth between prover and verifier). They are efficient in both proof size and verification time, regardless of the size of the problem.

- ‍Groth16: Named after its inventor, Jens Groth, Groth16 uses a circuit-specific trusted setup procedure. It is known for producing very small proof sizes and is widely used in various blockchain projects and cryptographic applications such as ZCash and Loopring.‍

- PLONK (Permutation Argument over Lagrange bases for Oecumenical Noninteractive Arguments of Knowledge) is a versatile zero-knowledge proof system that uses a universal and updatable Structured Reference String (SRS). The trusted setup only needs to be calculated once and can be reused for multiple circuits, therefore offering greater flexibility relative to Groth16. It also enables easier addition of new programs or circuits without redoing the entire setup. Examples of PLONK protocols include Plonky2 and Halo2.


STARKs (Scalable Transparent Argument of Knowledge) - uses a setup process that doesn't rely on secret parameters. Instead, it uses hash functions and publicly known randomness to construct proofs, making the setup "transparent" and trustless. Because ZK STARKs rely on hash functions rather than elliptic curves, they are quantum computing resistant.




Your program
↓
Arithmetic constraints
↓
Witness
↓
(then Groth16 / PLONK proves it)



later on we create a guessing game




Groth16 uses a two-phase setup process:

Powers of Tau phase: Creates a general SRS for circuits up to a given size. This phase is not circuit-specific. It generates a set of elliptic curve points based on random value τ. The output of this phase can be reused for multiple circuits up to a certain size limit, determined by the degree of the highest power of τ.
Circuit Specific: The parameters generated during the first phase are combined with the polynomials from the circuit’s R1CS representation and used to generate circuit-specific keys:
Proving key (PK): Used by the prover to generate proofs.
Verification key (VK): Used by the verifier to verify the proofs.





comopile the circuit
```sh
circom src/testing/groth16/circuits/testing.circom \
  --r1cs \
  --wasm \
  --sym \
  -o src/testing/groth16/build
  ```

generate witness
```sh
node src/testing/groth16/build/testing_js/generate_witness.js \
  src/testing/groth16/build/testing_js/testing.wasm \
  src/testing/groth16/input.json \
  src/testing/groth16/build/witness.wtns
```

inspect the circuit
```sh
npx snarkjs r1cs info src/testing/groth16/build/testing.r1cs
```


Groth16 setup phase
- install power of Tau
```sh
npx snarkjs powersoftau new bn128 12 src/testing/groth16/build/pot12_0000.ptau -v
```

- contribute to the ceremony ( this adds entropy{randomness})
```sh
npx snarkjs powersoftau contribute \
  src/testing/groth16/build/pot12_0000.ptau \
  src/testing/groth16/build/pot12_0001.ptau \
  --name="First contribution" \
  -v


npx snarkjs powersoftau prepare phase2 \
  src/testing/groth16/build/pot12_0001.ptau \
  src/testing/groth16/build/pot12_final.ptau \
  -v

```


Phase 2 — Circuit-specific setup
Now we bind the universal setup to your exact circuit into an output zkey.
- 

```sh
npx snarkjs groth16 setup \
  src/testing/groth16/build/testing.r1cs \
  src/testing/groth16/build/pot12_final.ptau \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/testing_0000.zkey
```

- Contribute once again
```sh
npx snarkjs zkey contribute \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/testing_0000.zkey \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/testing_final.zkey \
  --name="Circuit contribution" \
  -v
```


NOW GENERATE PROOFS(generate the actual proof from the witness and the final zkey)

```sh
npx snarkjs groth16 prove \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/testing_final.zkey \
  src/testing/groth16/build/witness.wtns \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/proof.json \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/public.json
```


- Export Verification key
```sh
npx snarkjs zkey export verificationkey \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/testing_final.zkey \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/verification_key.json
```

- Verify the proof
```sh
npx snarkjs groth16 verify \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/verification_key.json \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/public.json \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/proof.json
```




EXAMPLE

-     regenerate witness
* regenerate proof
* verify again



ONCHAIN VERIFICATION METHOD
- generate soliidty verifier
```sh
npx snarkjs zkey export solidityverifier \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/testing_final.zkey \
  src/testing/groth16/contracts/Verifier.sol
```
 - install foundry and cp the generated verifier into it

- generate the calldata to test for
```sh
npx snarkjs zkey export soliditycalldata \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/public.json \
  src/testing/groth16/build/outputs/proof.json
```

- Run the foundry test
forge test